# 84 Merge Sort introduction

- combination of two things - mergeing and sorting
- exploits the fact that arrays of 0 or 1 element are always sorted
- works by decomposing an array into smaller arrays of 0 or 1 elements, then building up a newly sorted array

## How does it work?
```
[8,3,5,4,7,6,1,2]
[8,3,5,4] [7,6,1,2]
[8,3] [5,4]  [7,6] [1,2]
[8] [3] [5] [4] [7] [6] [1] [2]
```

Now we merge the 8 single element arrays
```
[8] [3] [5] [4] [7] [6] [1] [2]
[3,8]  [4,5]  [6,7]  [1,2]
```

We just compare the numbers and whichever is smaller goes first into the new array for each set, and we repeat

```
[8] [3] [5] [4] [7] [6] [1] [2]
[3,8]  [4,5]  [6,7]  [1,2]
[3,4,5,8]  [1,2,6,7]
[1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8]
```

It involves splitting up until they're sorted or one item long. Then we merge them.

check it out on visualgo.com

# 85 merging arrays

We assume the arrays are sort so always we need to do is return the combination.

```
merge([1,10,50],[2,14,99,100])
//should return
[1,2,10,14,50,99,100]
```

- in order to implement merge sort, it's useful to first implement a function responsible for merging two sorted arrays
- given two arrays which are sorted, this helper function should create a new array which is also sorted, and consists of all the elements in the two input arrays
- this function should run in **O(n+m)** time and **O(n+m)** space and **should not** modify the parameters passed to it.

## Merging arrays pseudocode

- create an empty array, take a look at smallest values in each input array
- need two counters i and j which should both start at 0
- while there are still values we haven't looked at...
    - if the value in the first array is smaler than the value in the second array, push the value in the first array into our results and move on to the next value in the first array
    - if the value in the first array is larger than the value in our second array, push the value in the second array into our results and move on to the next value in the second array
    - once we finish one array, push in all remaining values from the other array

For example take these two arrays:
```
[1,10,50],[2,14,99,100]
[]
```
we have two counters `i` and `j`

So we compare `1` and `2` which one is smaller.
`1` is smaller so we put it in our result
```
[1,10,50],[2,14,99,100]
[1]
```
And we move on to `10` and compare that to `2`. Since `2` is smaller than `10` we end up with:
```
[1,10,50],[2,14,99,100]
[1,2]
```
and we shift up our counter for the 2nd array to look at `14` and we compare that to `10`. Since `10` is smaller we end up with:
```
[1,10,50],[2,14,99,100]
[1,2,10]
```
And now we're looking at `50` and `14` and end up with:
```
[1,10,50],[2,14,99,100]
[1,2,10,14]
```
`50` and `99` results with:
```
[1,10,50],[2,14,99,100]
[1,2,10,14,50]
```
and we run out of numbers to compare in our first array so we add the remaining `99,100` from the other array since they're already sorted in the same way.

```
[1,10,50],[2,14,99,100]
[1,2,10,14,50,99,100]
```

# 86 merging arrays: implementation

- we define 2 counters for each array index, we'll call them `i, j`
- the first loop only applies while we're looping through both at the same time.
- if the arr1[i] is less than arr2[j], we push it into results, and move up the counter for i
- we do same for j as the else condition
- the remaining two while loops are there to grab the remaining items for either array and push them into results.
```
function merge(arr1, arr2){
    let results = [];
    let i = 0;
    let j = 0;
    while(i < arr1.length && j < arr2.length){
        if(arr2[j] > arr1[i]) {
            results.push(arr1[i]);
            i++
        } else {
            results.push(arr2[j])
            j++;
        }
    }
    while(i < arr1.length) {
        results.push(arr1[i])
        i++;
    }
    while(j < arr2.length) {
        results.push(arr2[j])
        j++;
    }

    return results;
}
```

this is the first and longest part of constructing merge sort. Right now this only works for two sorted arrays.

# 87 MergeSort pseudocode

*Most merge sort implementations use recursion.*

- break up array into halves until you have arrays that are empty or have one element.
- once you have smaller sorted arrays, merge those arrays with the other sorted arrays until you are back at the full length of the array
- once the array has been merged back together, return the merged (and sorted) array

# 88 Merge sort implementation

```
function merge(arr1, arr2){
    let results = [];
    let i = 0;
    let j = 0;
    while(i < arr1.length && j < arr2.length){
        if(arr2[j] > arr1[i]){
            results.push(arr1[i]);
            i++;
        } else {
            results.push(arr2[j])
            j++;
        }
    }
    while(i < arr1.length) {
        results.push(arr1[i])
        i++;
    }
    while(j < arr2.length) {
        results.push(arr2[j])
        j++;
    }
    return results;
}

// Recrusive Merge Sort
function mergeSort(arr){
    if(arr.length <= 1) return arr;
    let mid = Math.floor(arr.length/2);
    let left = mergeSort(arr.slice(0,mid));
    let right = mergeSort(arr.slice(mid));
    return merge(left, right);
}

mergeSort([10,24,76,73,72,1,9])

```

So we take our merge helper method and toss it in from previous chapter. Then we write our merge sort function. We need to split our input array in half so we take the Math.floor (to get a whole number) of the length of our array, and divide by 2.

If you remember in binary search we did the same thing.

then we do arr.slice(0,3) and that will split on array, then we will call mergeSort on those arrays.

So we define our midpoint with `mid` and define our left and right side with `left` and `right`.

If we look at just left we are calling merge sort on `[10,24,76]` and it's called again, and now we call mergeSort on `[10],[24,76]`
and then again to give us `[10][24][76]` then we have to merge them back together.

We merge the left and the right.
If you want to see it in action, put a breakpoint on the return and check out the callstack.



